# stannish_book_notes
notes on Charles Stannish' _Evolution of Human Cooperation: Ritual and Social Complexity in Stateless Societies_

Chapter 1: the evolution of human co-operation

    The major problem this book seeks to resolve is how do people living small groups without money, markets, policing powers, bureaucracies, social classes, and other coercive mechanisms develop norms and rules of economic and social co-operation that are sustainable over time?
    This is achieved by “ritualizing” the economy
    The key for non-related people to develop norms of cooperation without political coercion is they must deal with the free-rider problem.
    The more successful complex stateless societies create social organizations that allow individual members of the group to benefit in ways that they cannot in smaller pop sizes
    Informal social coercion exists in all stateless societies as well as state societies.
    Manifests as taboo, black magic, etc
    Stateless societies are notable for their absence of institutionalized elites with power to obligate others without a substantial consensus among the community.
    Power in stateless societies is fundamentally different - it is ad hoc, granted, withdrawn by the community at large
    These people in stateless societies who take on organizational tasks are called “managerial leaders”
    They asume costly, prosocial roles, and are rewarded with prestige and other resources
    Nonstate or chiefly elites develop into coercive hierarchies by taking advantage of reosurcs or social stresses = basically a lie
    Economic game theory’s rational actor is nonsense, and inadequate for understanding the structure of the small grpups that characterize stateless societies.
    New insights into human sociality predicated on vrious types of prosocial behavioral characteristics, irrational prosocial behavior, is actually social rationality. This is used to distijnguish it from classical game theory’s rationalbehavior.
    Homo reciprocans or conditional co-operation
    Work in evolutionary game theory indicates that the social dynamics of small groups are significantly different than those of big ones
    The role of reputation in long-term socialinteration is key for maintaining co-operation in small groups
    People living in small groups where coercion is absent (the State), are conditional cooperators. Creating complex co-operative arrangements under appropriate conditions.
    They can be induced to co-operate under the right social and material conditions. People are intelligent and adaptive agents and are not always rational in the sense of homo-economicus. They are perfectly rational in the social rationality sense tho
    These underlying conditions affecting the likelihood of co-operation are: the degree to which co-operations benefits individuals in the group, the interaction’s fairness, and labor by individuals being reciprocated or rewarded in some tangible manner
    Humans co-operate with nonkin at a massive scale. Second we do it with speech, symbols, and cultural transmission, so coopertive behaviors spread at crazy high rates
    We can have emergent properties in human social interactions that create stable complex co-operative societies in the absence of coercion but still satisfy that everyone act in their own self-interest
    What rules emerging from repeated interactions of individuals and trasmitted through the generations allow for co-operation?
    How are they converted into social norms and customs?
    The key to these questions is coupling the logic of evolutionary cooperation and collective acton. How you deal with free-riders and with rewarding cooperation
    They create rules of cooperative economic behavior, and encode them into ritual practices. This ritual economy is then structured by ritual, enculturated by habit, and transmitted into norms and beliefs sustained by prosocial altruistic behaviors. These norms then are subjet to selective pressure over generations
    These blood feuds and chief shit BS is actually viewed via a western lens. If you try to understand them through the lens of the people who use them, you see that these behaviors are encoded by ritualized norms that are instinctively understood by virutally all, they structure their lives to deal with difficulties of keeping distantly or nonrelated peoples co-operatijng with each other. They’re present everywhere that the west hasn;’t ruined shit
    Stateless societies have solved for the labor theory of value. Attributing who did what in a group setting is hard and consequently so is divvying up resources, so potlatches, feastss, and taboo are used to manage this. What looked like a waste of time to westerners is actually an intelligent and strategic practice to ease these kinds of tensions around who contributed what and how much. Leaders schedule labor tasks, regulate redistribution of goods in a way that is fair and understandable by the community. The taboos serve to punish free-riders and allow the community to exercise some order in the way in which work and trade are conducted.
    These rituals and norms are instinctively understood virtually by all people in premodern societies. They developed to dealwith the difficulties of keepijng distantly related people co-operating with each other.
    what is the operative unit and material basis of successful co-operative economic organizations in stateless society? they create rudimentary economies of scale structured by ritual and taboo. the view that the world was just warlords and violence is nonsense because that kind of inter-group raiding creates a profound incentive to cooperate.
    one example. say a group of five families comes together to lower transaction costs and make pottery scale. the problem now is who owns what. in state societies you have contracts, private property, slavery etc to decide who owns theoutput. without that you instead have ritual, feasting, and taboo. you use these to reward co-operation and punish free-riders. the pots group may do very well for themselves and trade and barter and grow. others will see this and mirror their norms, an example of co-operation by competition (they might use the same norms to make e.g. other crafts, not pots, but use the same norms).
    in the absence of state-backed coercive norms, individuals acquiring prestige, ritual status, and greater access to material goods by sponsoring important events for the community, with social norms of co-operation encoded
    Hobbes theory on cooperation, life is nasty brutish and short and we need each other to cope, for mutual protection. people agree to transfer their natural rights of autonomy to a political authority out of fear and necessity.
    people do not voluntarily accept hierarchy. they are forced into it by the exigencies of life.
    Rousseau developed an alternative view, we're inherently good and other-directed, a world of abundance, where society creates scarcity and competition. the creation of private property was humanity's downfall. agriculture, metallurgy, and the arts created desires for things that were inherently scarce. property gave rise to laws, conflicts, and inequality, promoting institutions designed to protect property.
    this dichotomy between Hobbes and Rousseau is how we studied all primitive people, the hobbesian tradition gave us homo economicus and the rational agent. roussea gave us the savage and marxism etc. but this has been displaced by evolutionary game theory
    evolutionary game theory challenged homo economicus in the study of economic behavior and political strategies. what the early games of axelrod and others show is that rational actor theory did not adequately model the actions of people particularly in small groups where everyone knew each other. the assumption had always been that people would maximize their own utility. in the west, it means maximizing the advantage in any economic interaction on the basis of price, this is the basis of all western economic theory for more than a century. experimental evolutionary game theory reserch has invalidated most of homo economicus.
    humans can be irrationally pro-social, demand fairness, or co-operate under the appropriate conditions. this contradicts rational actor theory, but is at the heart of every human society. most importantly, this work showed that selfish individuals could create co-operative groups without any kind of coercive power or overarching authority.
    in reality, most humans are simultaneously ego-directed and prosocial under the appropriate conditions, and the principle of conditional co-operation provides the basis for this as a model.

monuments are an example of competition leading to cooperation. as the monuments get bigger, more leaders get more prestige, more social interaction occurs, more are drawn in and hosted, reciprocal relationships intensity and more resources are created / distributed.
Chapter 2 - Economic Anthropology of Stateless Societies: The Rise and Fall of Homo economicus

    the first euros who encountered "primitive" societies did not understand what they were looking at. they saw people share food, have festivals, and not participate in organized labor. they had to be forced to create labor markets via slavery and force, and they did this to bring them into the "modern world"
    they viewed much of what they say through rational actor theory, and people here did not act that way. they did not work to achieve one's goals in a rational utilitarian way. it was how euros rationalized a network of self-interested people creating "prosperity". and people who rejected this did not prosper, so they must be brought into modernity by any means.
    this is how the homo economicus was created. for mill it was a heuristic tool but it became a reality for political economists. and it became the predominant model in anthropology (formalism), canonical model in human behavior, and the basis of classical economics.
    this prevented us from understanding that small scale stateless societies were not passive reactors but conscious agents who molded their everyday lives and environments in extremely sophisticated ways they had social organiztion norms and more for creating sustained co-operation in economic life.
    the evolution of society was viewed in terms of first myth, then organized religio, then science. that's it. OF COURSE this excludes a number of indigenous societies and ways of seeing
    Adam smith basically acknowledged some truths here: that people act out of their own self-interest, that we can't rely on benevolence alone to meet our needs, and that it is natural for us to brter and exchange. and this was built upon a hobbesian view of nature.
    co-operation derives from the inherent desire of people to engage in exchange, both a product and a cause of the division of labor
    so at this point the european thinks that people are inherently prone to antisocial behavior and civil society keeps them cooperating (the social contract). giving up autonomy and freedom of action to the state for security. and it is this assumption that under girds humans inherently maximizing their utility.

the other assumption here is that economic man assumed a universal scarcity of needs and wants, this was based on Malthus.

    And it was upon this that JS Mill built the economic man model, but in the same paragraph he says it is not an actual description of human behavior. it is just a necessary concept in the construction of a science of human economic decision making. and with it came a host of unproven assumptions, tat people want and need to barter, that they need to produce and exchange and consume in society. you need a market economy and enclosure to do that. 

euros basically defined whoever learns to store and produce wealth as the measure of progress

they linked excessive gift giving and feasting with primitiveness

however it was their own rational actor assumptions that made it impossilble for them to understand what they were actually seeing

    Malinowksi and the trobriand islanders were amongst the first challenges to this homo economicus POV. Malinowski was able to show that with regard to making a living from their environment, trobriand islanders were far more rational than given credit for by our Economic Man models. He and Franz Boas spent a considerable amount of time with these people, not doing 2nd hand accounts like armchair anthropologists of the time who used bureaucratic accounts that led to misconceiving stateless economies.
    Malinowksi showed that it is neither Hobbesian primitiveness nor Roussea-esque noble savage waiting to get the fruits of nature for free lol. natives work hard to grow food, fish, and collect wild foods. they produced substantial surplus. then they socially organized and regulated production exchange and consumption with ritual and custom
    Malinowksi broke with economic man by saying that people in non-western societies are socially directed, not ego directed.
    in non-western societies, people do not maximize material wants, but rather seek to satisfy social wants. they barter but not for profit, for social prestige or for the community.
    the economic and the ritual are intertwined. "economic enterprise and magical ritual form one inseparable whole, the forces of the magical belief and the efforts of man moulding and influencing one another"

this all coalesced in an intellectual spat between substantivist and formalist anthropologists. the substantivists claimed on hobbesian malthusian and darwinian grounds that people were fundamentally ego directed and so each economy had to be evluated on its own terms. formalists who were more rousseaian and marxist thought there were more universal features to economic life that could apply to the west and non-west.

one of the implications is the Western economics in all of its entirety is merely a branch of Economic Anthropology, since all cultures must make decisions about how to allocate resources based on scarcity. both have a key implication, that coercion or force is responsible for the emergence of rank and social hierarchy in the shift from hunter-gathere societies to ranked ones. the author contends that this is incorrect. it is not necessary to explain the formation of complex stateless societies. ritual and other forms of social organization explain it well enough (which could also be the Scott thesis)
Chapter 3: Conditional Co-operators: The Evolutionary Game Theory Revolution

    people are neither hobbesian hyperrational selfish actors nor fully other-directed rousseaian utopians. the substantivist-formalist debate is bsaically not even a debate, cause it shows that ego-directed others will situationally cooperate under the right circumstances.
    this ALSO means that the definition of a rational agent as simply a decision maker who acts in pursuit of his or her objectives, (maximizing his or her utility), can be universally applied, because when a person acts altruistic and prosocial, that is not selecting against their own self interest, it can be situationally selecting for both their own ego0-directed needs, and for other-directed benefits, in the same direction.
    culture matters, and it shapes the economic behavior and forms and nature of cooperation in small societies.
    for approximately 95% of our existence as humans on the planet, our ancestors shaped a system of governance that without the asssitance of governments avoided the chaos of the hobbesian state of nature.
    game theory and its related fields of evolutionary and anthropological game theory provide the theoretical framework for udnerstanding this.
    Nash equilibrium: exists when all players in a competitive game know all others' strategies and do not alter their own insofar as other players do not alter their strategies. there is no additional strategy that can alter any player's payoff.
    classical game theory derives from classical econ and assumes that people are generally rational and knowledgeable about the environment. It explicitly derives from homo economicus as its central assumption.
    Rational is a loaded term because it assumes that all people in all places and times will always evaluate the benefits and costs of a strategy in similar ways and adopt the "optimal" strategy - they are always ego directed and act in their self interest. While this works for buying and selling commodities, it falls apart for small groups.
    real social life is substantially more cokmplex than classical game theory allows for. new bodies of theory demonstrate that people are "irrationally" prosocial particularly in small groups. but irrationally prosocial behavior is key to understanding co-operation.
    The issue then becomes how do we keep people from cheating on one hand, and cooperating?
    from the perspective of evolutionary biology, cooperation between nonkin should not exist, yet it does. why?
    two debates: individual vs. group selection and whether co-operative behavior is culturally or genetically based.
    group selection is typically dismissed because biologists cannot produce models in which altruistic individuals wil survive over time unless the altruosmis directed toward relatives only
    others focus on our ability to make social norms and informal insitutions that are capable of domesticating our innate psdychology for life in ever-expanding populations. these strategies of co-operative behavior trick the evolutionary heuristics that evolved in humans in the paleolithic.
    but there remains one key confounder here. there is one key difference across all the disciplines, they each define payoff differently, and this changes everything. Evobiologists consider payoff reproductive success, the number of offspring with genes passed on = success. in game theory with iteration, economists focus on material success (i.e. gains, utility, money). Anthropologists focus on status or prestige.
    there is a legibility problem here. economics measures $, evolutionary biology offspring, which are both countable and easy to model. status and prestige are not. The most prestigious person could be the least well-off because giving away more shit = more status. Prestige and status motivate people as much as wealth, and this is true especially in societies without developed markets, currencies, or stores of wealth.
    A lot of indigenous societies solved for this by recognizing as a group that the existence of a coordinator given certain privileges for the effort to maintain fairness and norms of reciprocity, can be beneficial for the group overall. That's how we resolved the apparent dilemma between prestige and wealth / reproduction. they're facilitators of co-operative behavior who in turn earn nonmaterial prestige as their payoff for altruistic efforts.
    co-operation in humans organized by managers is central to resolving the collective action problem (free-riders, etc).
    Evolved Psychology in the past 10000 years: earliest language is 40,000 years old. our art is similar. war peace religion and politics are similar behavirs, etc.
    However evolutionary game theorists suggestthat social behavior is also genetically based, an observable characteristic like any other trait and should therefore be subject to natural selection. The author of this book contends that there is selection on the culturally constructed straegies of interaction, but not on the genes of interaction and cooperation themselves.
    Anthropological game theory provides alternatives bsed on human recognition of strategic utility of seemingly altruistic behavior, less of an emphasis on biological determinism. We require more than concepts of evobio to understand human co-operation.
    our highly evolved capacity for language, cognition, and ability to maintain sustained interaction with others based on our ability to differentiate co-opertors and non co-operators, basically our ability to play infinite games. shared intentionality. this enables us to create and use linguistic symbols, social norms, and social institutions.
    this highly developed capacity indicates that our strongly prokmotd reproductive fitness is due to social innovations, not purely to genes and evolved psychology. because it is unique to us it is hard to explain other organisms succees in our terms
    Axelrod showed the tension between the advantages of selfishness in the short run vs. the need to elicit cooperation from the other player to be successful in the long run
    the outcome of one-shot (one round, finite) prisoner's dilemma games is rationality - people act in their own self interest. the iterated version of the game produces Tit for Tat. cooperate first always but remmeber non-cooperators.
    Cooperation can emerge in a population of unrelated individuals where there is a possibility of reciprocity. it is viable in fitness terms only if there is a likelihood that the two unrelated individuals or groups will meet again in the future. this continuity is essential in securing cooperative social relations. this shows the importance of population densities in the emergence of initial social complexity in stateless societies, i.e. if you dont have sufficient concentration of potential reciprocators / cooperators, there is no incentive to do so and the behavior does not emerge.
    the ultimatum game result is also important cause it shows that cross-culturally, the expectations of homo economicus (the canonical model). the rational model is that the proposer offers the smallest possible share and the responder is supposed to accept it. but in practice everyone divvies it up to make it more fair. So if you have $120, literally NO ONE offers the responder $1. everyone does like 40-80 or 60-60. we learn that where there is frequent face to face interaction on a daily basis, the demand for fairness is intense, and seemingly non-negotiable.
    The elements of co-operation: Fairness, reputation, reward, and punishment.
    Consistent adherence to the norms of fairness and free-rider punishment stand as fundamental and necessary conditions for the emergence and maintenance of co-operative orgnaizations in the absence of coercion.
    Leaders must persuade people to work co-operatively providing material incentives and maintaining appropriate ideologies for reciprocity
    a survey was run on 20 villages in Zimbabwe. 14 were quite long-lived, around for a long time, 6 new settlers created by government land reform. the6 new ones highly valued fairness over all others as they were facing adversity. the 14 others, not so much. fairness and co-operation were more valued in newly founded villages because of their more precariousposition.
    in games that most approximate social reality in a simulated ultimatum game, martin nowak et al discovered an irrational human emphasis on fairness. people were ready to hurt cheaters even at a cost to themselves. without information on reputations or history, people replicate evolution's predominance of economically rational actors - offering little and rejecting nothing or offering a lot and accepting little.
    but if you add histories, people change theirbehavior. adaptation favors fairness over reason in the ultimatum game when you add history and reputation. strategies that are nonrational but promote economic exchange
    so the key result here is that the UG is really another example of the unique capacity of ego-directed selfish humans creating co-operative social institutions in the absence of coercion. fairness plays a central role in eliciting co-operation - any model of the origins of complex society based on small bands of hunter-gatherers must incorporate this fundameantal empirical insight from evolutionary game theory research.
    Reputation. the reasonable expectation of meeting people again in the future + ability to remember social histories, enables us to create cooperative structures
    Reward. the role of reward in stateless societies has been more important than punishment. in particular people engage in costly rewards to encourage group co-operation. the shift fromstateless to state-based societies entails a shift from primarily reward-based to punishment-based strategies.
    The Problem with WEIRD people. in studying non-western people, anthropologists / economic game theorists have found that the degree of market integration of a society dictates how fairly they play the UG game (ultimatum game). Also, they show that western-style market behaviors require people to develop norms of sharing necessasry for markets to function. non-western people tend to place less importance on choice, are more holistic in their reasoning, and are less concerned with seeing themselves as above average.
    people who grew up in large industrialized societies differ from people in small-scale ones and we cannot use WEIRD people to define evolved psychology. How far do they deviate from the norm?
    it's all a matter of degree not kind. the big difference is that e.g. Fijians are a lot less likely to punish than US undergrads in similar games. Fijians share without the need for punishment. There is also no society wheree behavior is consistent withthe canonincal model "self-interest"
    the results of 20 years of UG experiments are almost uniform in rejecting the canonical rational actor model.
    however, the stakes matter. people find it fair enough to pay 5k from a 100k windfall, but do not accept $3 from a $20 windfall, and this effect of the overall stakes is understudied. it's impact on perceptionof fairness.
    as the stakes go up, people shift away from economically irrational socially essential methods to more canonical, rational methods. and this reflects the change in complexity of a society, from complex industrialized ones to small-scale ones. In order for us to understand small-scale societies we need a different set of tools - anthropological game theory.
    the term for the field that studies noncanonical behavior of people in small groups. people are still ego-directed but do not behave "rationally" in the classic economic sense until you have groups of ~500 or more. individuals don't rationally calculate but they do adapt their strategies over time based on what is more or less effective. Coercion does not emerge until we have larger societies with institutionalized forms of leadership - the archaic state.

Chapter 4: The Role of Coercion in Social Theory

    a cornerstone of the canonical model is that people will adopt more complex forms of sociopolitical integration like markets if they are forced by social and environmental pressures. (specifically in archaeology and evolutionary anthropology).
    the assumption is that all forms of rank are negative for most of the population, so you have to force people into hierarchies. force is a central causal agent in the rise of complex stateless societies, both in the substantivist rousseau-marxist view, and the formalist Mill-esque classical liberal view. This is an incorrect assumption based on the results of evolutionary game theory of the late 20th / early 21st century.
    summary of the formalist position: a world populated by agents who are by nature inherently ego directed, life is short ,competitive, and difficult, and the state emerged out of an egalitarian society as a necessary but negative means of social control. classical political economists assumed that our ancestors were tamed by the state (savages), with market exchange emerging as one of the great pacifiers of our inherently combative nature. this naturally leads to hierarcheis where we accept that one class of elites coopted social power.
    in contrast the utopian substantivists assumptions are that the world is populated by other-directed reatively peaceful people where social values trump material ones. The rise of patriarchy, private property and the state destroyed reciprocity and the generalized sense of equality from stateless societies. BUT importantly the same result followed, elites coopted power
    it remains difficult to explain why people would voluntarily give up autonomy to permit an elite group to develop
    economic surplus is a precondition for hierarchy, so why would anyone allow others to have power over them if this is where it leads? there are only two ways to the increased production necessary to have surplus - induce more people to work or get people to work more. bth are coercive and assume that people would not voluntarily give up autonomy or resources unless threatened with force.
    This is actually incorrect! Good news.
    Western people also could not tell the difference between first among equals in stateless societies and a bona fide elite with institutionalized power to exploit people (nobles and knights). chiefs were petty kings
    this is also because most working anthropologists view the development of rank as a cost to the bulk of society, and perhaps these petty kings in stateless societies were not much the development of rank but more temporary fluid structures
    hierarchy in any sense in state societies is bad, but the facts of archaeology and ethnography say this is not true for stateless societies.states rarely emerge, but when they do they have the classic hallmarks of coercive hierarchty and rank. there were no class wars in complex stateless societies, is the short way of saying that

The Ethnographic data on Coercion in Stateless Societies

    Among the melanesians, the nuer, and the amba (of central africa), formal coercion is virtually absent. chiefs are merely go betweens, who act in negotiations of e.g. blood feuds to maintain pro-social cooperative atmospheres. they hold no formal power over the people feuding and they can't punish anyone.
    The british complained that the Nuer are hard to control because the "leopard-chiefs" hold no coercive or judcial authority, so viable administrative structures were impossible to put in place. "nuer chiefs are sacred persons butt heir sacredness gives them no formal authority outside of specific social situations"
    in other situations like the Konkomba of west africa, there is an ancestor cult and no formal coercion exists outside of the ritual and moral power of the Elder (ancestors)
    The core of the issue with western anthropologists is that they re-create the Hobbesian / Rousseauian false dichotomy, either a hobbesian world of purely ego directed struggle or a rousseauian world of other-directed nobel savages, and he seeks to crush the latter and buittress the former (Hayden). He thinks that all co-operators are aggrandizers looking to hijack social dynamics in a status game. He then ends up arguing that since there are aggresive people in any society, there mst be substantial coercion in all societies, including stateless ones (false). the problem is that aggressive people doesn't mean cops or institutions like copping
    also the existence of war does not imply the existence of coercion, because war is all about intragroup co-operation, maybe the most co-operatuion that gets done between strangers in raiding parties. this is a well established feature of collective action theory.
    In states, all of life is structured around coercion to get people to do things they don't want to do, they all know this too, and there is an ideology to put them in their place as well. in stateless ones there is more exit. you can leave. youcan remove a leader. if youre a sllave in a stateless society there is a debt obligation but it is part of a larger web of reciprocities, you can get out of it eventually.
    super interesting questions that will be answered in the rest of the book

How does complex soci- ety emerge in such a noncoercive environment?

We have established that people are not forced to accept social complexity prior to state emergence.

What if it were possible to demonstrate that rank and hierarchy could emerge from egali- tarian groups without coercion?

That is, what if you could demonstrate that ego- directed individuals could develop large-scale and stable co-operation among unrelated people over time without overt coercion?

What if, in fact, these hier- archies for the benefit of the group were headed by chiefs with little de jure power but who rather were accorded ad hoc authority at the behest of the com- munity?

What if the emergence of a managerial hierarchy, accepted by small groups as a means to organize production and exchange for their own individual and collective benefit, provided such a selective advantage that groups would embrace these new organizations?

In other words, what if we could demon- strate either that people did not have to force others to accept hierarchy or that exogenous factors (population pressure, climate change, and so forth) were not theoretically necessary to force people to accept hierarchy?

What if our own ethnocentric bias against rank, born of our culture’s 200-year history of politi- cal philosophy and two millennia long steel cold reality of exploitation of the many by the few, is not a good basis for understanding people who are not like us and who live in social contexts that we can only read about and barely imagine from our own cultural experience?

    game theorists have already provided very successful models for the emergence of complexity among ego-directed actors in small grojups in noncoercive contexts. specifically how they create ad-hoc figures of authority in order for those same selfish to survuive and thrve. 

Chapter 5: The Ritualized Economy: How People In Stateless Societies Co-operate

    there is a huge diversity in cutlural practices for how people co-operate to produce food, manufacture objects for trade, fish, hunt, how they exchange surplus, etc
    reciprocity is the fundamental socioeconomic mechanism of co-operation in virtually all societies. societies become more complex as the number and intensity of social relationships dedicated to survivng and thriving increase and form more complex levels of co-operative behavior between larger numbers of actors.
    Ritualizing behavior constitutes the mechanism by which rules and norms successfully structure co-perative economic relationships
    ritualized here refers t othe degree of abstraction in norms and rules of proper behavior in a society. How is the conecption of "proper behavior" shaped, and do people instinctively know them = ritualized
    economic co-operation depends on the creation of ritualized norms of behavior without money markets or coercion
    the cornerstone of western racism in belief was that noble savages believed in a world of religion and magic, when really they had developed, through selection, ways of surviving and thriving, without money makrets or coercion.
    ritualizing economic behavior is a very good fit for the theoretical need of rewarding co-operators and punishing defectors.
    Religion: the western state and society as understood by Max Weber. The traditional view of work prior to modern capitalism was that it was drudgery to be avoided, merely a means to other ends. the revolution that took place in protestant circles was to redefine work as a virtuous and godly activity in and of itself. Protestants developed ritualizing norms that became a methodical-rational organization of life, that blended psychological rewards with a strong work ethic focused on material success. these norms were ingeniously guided by new religious principles developed by radical theologians that tied predestination and divine will to social conformitty and economic success in life. his work demonstrates how a shift in religious beliefs and practiced can alter econmic behavior in profound ways. it also shows how ideology is causative and not epiphenomenal, at least for economic behaviors.
    Religions as the west knows them do not have a parallel in stateless societies, partly because the state used religion for its ends. to incorporate a vast array of differnt peoples with different languiages and norms, tocreate overarching belief systems under an expanding state entity.
    Magic: usually used in a way to impose taboos o neconomic activities in order to preserve a resource for a group, or prevent free-rider threats. Tikopia had a chief that imposed a taboo on coconuts to allow them to grow to maturity. this is a consgtant theme among chiefs in stateless societies
    in the hugely ethnocentric early vision of western anthropologists, religions of "primitive people" were focused on this world, on the here and now, whereas modern people had a view into the future and the world beyond this one. so ritual being central to economic behaviors was a big surprise for these racist shitheads.
    ethnographic and historical examples: the chief and the garden magician of the trobriand islanders for instance had a garden magician and a chief who used rites and spells to initiate each new stage of work and the development of plant life
    the use of ritual to schedule labor has extremely deep roots in all human societies, e.g. agile sprints and lean ux and standups and shit
    where does the payoiff for co-operating come from in stateless societies that do not practice coercion? how can individuals increase their resources disproprotionately to the increase in labor inputs or other costs associated with cooperating to get more resources?
    all of these societies have norms around reciprocity, barter, and redistribution (a form of deferred reciprocity). Key questions like "who owns the resources obtained and/or created from a group?" must be answered for, and they are answered for by ritual. ritual schedules the key period when rewards accrue to individuals.
    one key insight here is that most concepts developed to explain capitalist and westrern economies, like interest, prices, inflation are useless, but economies of scale are not. Utility, marginal utility, and comparative advantage are usefukl in explaining the nonmarketbarter exchange typical of stateless societies.
    there is a small but growing theoretical and empirical literautre that demonstartes that overcoming collective action problems involves a reduction of transaction costs. co-operative labor achieves greater per capita returns for all involved. trhe complex norms themselves reduce transaction costs, and provide assurances of satisfactory sharing and payoffs. Sahlins said you could only have more people work, or have people do more work, but tghat is not true - if you create rudimentary economies of scale based on task specialization, by individual ghouseholdsm you can produce more without working more.

the two types of economies of scale in stateless societies

type 1

    type 1 scale economies are ones where specialized labor is done in cooperation outside of individual householsd. it beats individual ghouseholds because people can hyper specialize in parts of a task like axe making and quarry mining. A leader is then appointed in a ritual fashion to make sure that the spoils are divvied up in an equitable way. people dont get out what they put in, but ritual makes it ok and addresses the free-rider problem
    type 2 scale economies are things that simple can't happen without a critical mass of humans, i.e. a raiding party or a trading party that must venture out to trade goods with anothjer community. it can't go unless there are enough people to progvide security and safe passage.
    these are the two ways gthat have been observed for generating a surplus without violating norms of fairness
    this brings up another issue - how to maintain cooperation without defection. an ideology of reciprocity is crucial to this, which is usually accomplished via ritual and / or magic.
    the approach in anthropological game theory is that humans are intelligent decisionmakers who can create or imitate successful strategies to deal with the problesm of the nevironment. it is not a coincidence that for example in semiarid to wet regions the world over humans develop the same 1-3 strategies worldwide for agriculture. the same convergence is true for social organization - the way that people construct co-operatiion between themslves is a social technology, some are better thanothers in surviving and thriving.
    household and suprahousehold groups. the individual agent is the smallest unit of production and consumption amongst westerners. among marxists it is the community, primitive communism (this is actually rare in stateless societies). Here, it is the family unit in stateless societies.
    Examples: Iroquois, British Columbian groups of North America, LBK cultures of neolithic europe => longhouses full of multiple families, enclosed villages
    the organizational principle here is that there might be a longhouse of 10-12 households. everything in the household unit is shared equitably regardless of who did the work to get it. and this pattern is conserved across indonesia, Siang people in Borneo, the Maori, etc. very common for a household to be a unit of consumption and production.
    in addition all of these societies divide up the work and have feasting rituals for people when they cannot work.
    the evolution of complexity can be seen as a process in which more socially autonomous households work together as units to co-operate for mutually beneficial econmic goals. there was much experimentation at the level of social organization and it seems almost all pre-state societies settled at an eqilibrium around the household. bigger and smaller fractured or failed.
    magic is interwoven with the technical steps in a similar way to how white collar work is magical. think design thinking, all hands rituals, etc, but for a canoe. in the maori case they use ritual feasting to ensure a norm of group co-operation, the members of the crews have an obligation to the owners who provide the feast to do the work, and it doesnt happen without the rituals
    the maori chiefs in partiuclar exercised what little authority they had to initiate economic enterprises, that also ghappened to preserve food, fish, and forests.
    "Magic is a very useful reinforcement for rational rules" - Raymond Firth
    e.g. if a newly built meeting-house was completed, there would be a taboo against it for a while, to establish it effectively as private property. but that taboo would expire after a while and it would return tot he community.
    managerial leaders possessing ad-hoc ritual power (this ad-ghoc nature is also present in the accounts of anarchist self-management in spain by frank mintz) were necessary for effective functioning of the social group in economic activities. it is the fusing of the religious with the practical that makes the ritual useful.
    trobriand islanders, the Labai people, the Dyaks, all participate in shark fishing and mullet fishing and the activity itself is mediated by magic and ritual
    a common faeture of small scale agricultural societies is rituals and feasts permeating the agricultural calendr, scheduling work for feasts, for planting, harvest, and apportioning of resources. these are all a series of reciprocal debts between households that ensure long-term cooperation + isolationg of free-riders.
    war and trade are deeply intertwined. raiding is a form of cooperation in societies where the principle foodstuff or economic trade object is so important it can't be priced, e.g. bedouins and camels, apaches and horses, etc. the raids are both for status and for utility, and have elaborate rituals to ensure ingroup cooperation in order to steal or drive economic exchange.
    hunter-gatherer-forager peoples exchanged with each other andw ith their settled neighbors. exchange a la trade and markets existed. it happened under monumental constructions without agriculture. so that fiction of progression of civilizations is exactly that.
    and in these situations you will need the craetion of more expansive norms because unrelated people will need to trade or engage over longer periods of time. How did they manage this? what rituals and norms were created? norms of barter exchange were created
    barter exchange: two kinds exist. direct exchange, and money-mediated. can be immediate or deferred. and stateless economies integrate many forms of money, and many forms of exchange. they do not have markets in the modern sense of the term.
    the current predominant form of exchange is market exchange, which goes back to the beginning of modernity, and further back in some cases to asia and the western world
    a long tradition in economic anthrpology decreed that markets did not exist until western society (substantivist tradition, Karl Polanyi). Polanyi felt that all trade prior to the modern period in the west was not based on market mechanisms like supply-demand, and all of it was embedded in social relations controlled by kin or political institutions. this is wrong. There are plenty of market mechanisms that go beyond western contexts well before the modern periodd. (North, Douglass C. 1977. Markets and other allocation systems in history: The challenge of Karl Polanyi. Journal of European Economic History 6(3): 703–716.)
    markets as a place vs. markets as a set of rules and strategies. the latter is mostly developed by economists and economic historians, it is their POV. markets as a place are more anthropological tradition. the latter is focused on answering how is value established, and the nature of transaction costs
    price-making markets have never been documented in stateless societies (markets as an information processing mechanism)
    barter exchange markets however are the vast bulk of all exchange in human history. done without currency, and is culturally grounded. exchange develops in pretty straightforward ways - the marginal utility of all goods in a community is increased by trade because of the short usespan of a lot of the goods. i.e. your tenth cup of peanut butter will go bad, exchange it for marine resources or mountain goods. it is one of the most important ways to cooperate that we ever discovered. all parties can achieve nash equilibrium this way
    barter exchange started under religious institutions first before commercial ones. there were periodic congregations of the pious around religious shrines, these happened to be in central plazas and fairs. the pilgrims were often merchants
    this was nothing less than a ritualized economy in premodern Western society. The cloak of religion guaranteed security for the pilgrims and merchants. fairs were common in roman greece, in muslim spain during the middle ages, and throughout india.
    fairs were never really about economic exchange, they were about marriage pargtners, ritual, places to gamble and worship, gossip, etc. they were however, definietly a way to meet on a ritual calendar under ritualized norms of behavior.
    same for north america, the mandans of the middle missouri river had "trade centers" areas of major exchange routes, where people also met to marry exogamously (marry outside of your clan or tribe). Mandans held surpluses for trade as well (beans and maize)
    the Dalles river region hosted multiple clans and tribes from the entire area, in a big festival. they held massive surpluses (they were not subsistence economies, e.g. one group held 15 tons of dried fish to trade)
    Pecos pueblo in new mexico had pre-hispanic barter markets, the plain filled up with tents from late August to October with hundreds of Apache wh oarrived to trade and traffic. they brought hides, leather, dried meat, tanned skins, bone and flint tools, salt, and slaves. they wanted maize, agriculture foodstuffs, blankets, pottery, and turquoise.
    key to note, these fairs existed in uncontrolled stateless circumstances for many years before the arrival of formalized western states. example in Hawaii, they had plenty of them up till the 1820. the monarchy suppressed them because the people abolished the taboo system, and an entrenched elite replaced the taboo system. this elite brought the barter markets under state control (coercion). there is ubiquity of groups who had no contact iwth each other otherwise coming together seasonally to trade in festivals
    the labor theory of value still has some use barter exchange as a way of establishing value amongst negotiators, where production processes are not technologically complex (impossible to disentangle e.g. a worker's contribution from the capital investment necessary to have a factory for workers to use). very common for the native people of the andes in Peru to use how many hours it took to do something (gather potatoes, hunt fish, etc) as a way to signal its value. Llamas on the other hand were handled via supply and demand with a number of illegible factors coming into play. the definition of "fair" in an anthropological game theory context is determined by supply and demand, as well as upon the labor necessary to manufacture any good.
    maximizing utility is a human universal, but not neecssarily all in the same way, e.g. from the western lens. different cultures value different things, so you can have maximal utility along an axis that differs from the western rational actor one.
    in barter markets everyone knows how much labor time it costs to make most things, so markets can function with that level of knowledge. in addtiion, getting rich in a barter market is possible and market players have figured out how (e.g.Kula rings in Trobriand Islands). it isn't to sell more at a price making market, it is to make more relationships, and increase the # of trading partners. faction-building is the key skill.
    thios ability to acquire partners for trade is super important in regions where you have no blood relatives. elaborate rituals evolved to negotiate this, for ex blood brothers who would watch over you in a distant land, etc These were sanctioned by magic and taboo, and any breach would be punished by supernatural sanctions. these taboos functioned as punishment in the evolutionary game theory sense to keep dyadic co-operative relationships functioning
    key notes to the blood brother function: it is a anthropological game theory perspective that overcomes defection isues, and punishes severely for cheating.
    so your potential wealth is enclosed by how many blood brother relationships you can form and maintain
    feasts are incredibly important to structure social life for cooperation. the vast majority of nonstate societies in the americas had chiefs that were responsible for organizing feats. and feasts and ceremonies became the way to intermix between nonrelated people and nonkin. they inject novelty and creation into an otherwise monotonous life

    Within an anthropological game theory perspective, competitive feasting and other ceremonies, imbued with religious and ritual significance, constitute a principal means of strategically rewarding people to work differently in spe- cialized labor organizations (see Spielmann 2002). The logic is straightfor- ward: working in a new kind of labor organization produces more surplus with- out affecting household subsistence activities and without requiring more time from the individuals in the community. That surplus, in turn, can be used by aspiring leaders to host ceremonies and feasts that provide goods and social occasions otherwise not available. Autonomy is preserved, because any house- hold can pull out at will, as is evident in the ethnographic record. In short, everybody wins because with the same effort, there is a greater surplus gener- ated and available for community members. Prestige, bigger factions, and the possibilities of becoming even more powerful reward the organizational work by the managerial leader. 

    perishability of food + no way to account long term via money = stateless societies used potlatches to use surpluses to generate reciprocal obligations for future use. the best use of surplus is to give it away to generate cooperative reciprocal obligations.
    alcohol itself ends up being used in interesting ways - it becomes a medium for surplus agricultural produce to be converted indirectly into labor obligations, prestige, social credit, political power, bridewealth, or goods (trade)
    so what is the formula for why feasts happen, if they are expensive and risky if you fail? if you do it right, you get prestige, prestige = authority over labor relations = the ability to build new thuings and create new wealth / value.
    an underrated feature, these feasts also served to redistribute wealth among the commmunity, by putting back goods received from war or long-distance trade into play during the feast.
    conclusion: potlatches, barter, and fairs can be understood via an anthropological game theory lens. rudimentary economies of scale, both type 1 and type 2 provide surplus resources. these are used in the concept of reward and reciprocity (debt) in potlatches. aspiring leaders organize the labor from these debt feasts to create resources outside of the household (where people can also reject participation) using specialized labor groups, using type 2 economies of scale. the entire potlatch phenomenon is a massive act of costly signaling that redistributes resources, reinforces group cohesion, interfaces people with groups they dont see often, and ensures long-term cooperation via reciprocal obligations
    punishment: two forms work to ensure cooperation in stateless societies. first, a leader gains prestige and respect for punishing free-riders, and that also gets the group another person who chips in. huge array of taboos and social norms prevent and punish free-riding. secondly, there is punishment against domination from leaders. this takes the form of ridicule, because leaders rely on respect from the group to govern, and this is found far and wide in the ethnographic record, from the most distant village to the House of Lords (UK).
    something like 25% of the time, stateless societies in the ethnographic record would murder chiefs who abused their power. being too aggressive, dominating others, being ineffective or unresponsive, monopolizing resources or not being generous.
    the costly signaling model has 3 confirmed predictions from sociology and antrhopology (Henrich): participatin in costly rituals is associatd with prosocial ingroup behavior, because they transmit commitment to group beliefs, institutions requiring costly displays are favored by cultural evolution because members transmit higher levels of belief-commitment and promote success between groups, and 3 gthey spread to less cooperative groups becuase highly cooperative groups galvanize greater cooperation.
    imposing costlier requirements on the community correlates with long-lived communities - the more costly the signal the longer your cuture lives. through game theory, this makes sense. individuals who dont know each other are less likely to cooperate. if they think they are bound by some abstract norm, that will make them more likely to cooperate.

    These criteria are: (1) the degree to which adherence to moral codes in any group varies and is not observable; (2) that devotees of any religious practice benefit from having reliable infor- mation from those who are more co-operative in the religious practice; (3) that “devotees benefit from broadcasting their adherence” such that it increases their reputation for being prosocial. 

    In short, the building of special places is a necessary condition for the suc- cessful creation and maintenance of co-operative economic and social behavior. It is one of the conditions that allow H. reciprocans to flourish. These special places are highly variable and include ballcourts, dance grounds, kivas, men’s houses, utas, “chiefly mounds,” stone rings, and henge monuments. We could include scores more examples from the ethnographic literature. Once condi- tions in which the costs of co-operation are less than the costs of fissioning and defection obtain, people in stateless societies create a myriad of social orga- nizations, backed by ritualized behavior, to enhance co-operation among their members. The construction of monumental architecture that concentrates the resources and energy of the group is a universal strategy to maintain and pro- mote co-operation. In a social context of competition among different groups, and in the absence of some kind of overarching political authority, people will ratchet up the “magnificence” of the monumental architecture as a reaction to others. In these contexts, monumental architecture is simultaneously a means to promote co-operation and to compete with other co-operative groups in any cultural landscape. It is the core of any strategy for stateless societies to con- struct viable social technologies of co-operation. 

Chapter 6: Anthropological Game Theory Model for the Evolution of Ritualized Economies

    Ostrom was able to challenge conventional wisdom on "tragedy of the commons" by watching how people interact over resources on the ground, which let her identify recurrent institutional features with long-term success. Economists and theoretical biologists who developed mathematicallyt precise models ended up with things that did not map to social reality. Homo economicus was not actually reflected in how people divvy up resources or make decisions, especially for small groups (stateless societies).
    there is a lack of a strong empriical foundation in the models that economic game theorists, theoretical biologists, and economists have come up with for models of hguman behavior, particularly for how stateless people actually behave.
    The Model: people are not forced to adopt social hierarchies in complex stateless societies with rank. Population pressure does not force evolutionary change, there is instead a minimal population density that enables economies of scale for more complex forms of co-operation. in the model we would expect an initial increase in population density, followed by the development of special places like the central plaza or house or a small hut for ritual, followed by another populationincrease (the fruits of co-operation).
    the strategies of co-operative groups benefit all people in the group, and they can't be obtained without co-operation.
    Leadership or mangement positions are created by the group for the group interests. leaders are rewarded with prestige or resources or both, but leaders are there only to persuade people to work together, there is no formal coercion. communities can also spite thei rleaders when they dont like them, causing them to lose prestige and the ability to organize.
    effective groups that endure reward cooperation and punish free-riding. they also control for fluidity with exogamy.
    they adopt strategies for ritualization of production and exchange, e.g. feasting, potlatching, costly signaling, economies of scale, and heightened exchange, and the use of taboo for punishment etc.
    group formation is cyclical, there is no inevitability in the process. the suyccesful groups either lead to imtation from other groups or they absorb less succesful groups.
    the first great social transformation in human history: the pleistocene era hunter-forager organization. hunter-foragy society was restricted to bands of no more than a few dozen people, average 28, range 6-81. they began to build semipermanent setttlements, BUT NOT agriculture. then you had the dynamics shown above of people experimenting with cooperation, some groups survived others werent able to beat the free-rider problem. some of them formalized these norms into institutions of coercion leading to the modern period. agriculture is not necessary for social complexity to develop
    special places are a necessary step i nthese social transformations. but they were not built by settled agriculturalisgts, they were built by complex hunter-gatherer societies wiho ddid not cultivate plants or domesticate animals. emergent processes give rise to social technologies amongst these groups at least twice, one in the americas once in europe / asia. several millenia existed before we had great urban states. we had civil life before them.
    there was a direct, empirical shift i ncooperating beyond kin, and the capacity for symbolizing and absteracting behavior was key to this. evolutionary biolgical theory explains how and why we cooperated before these settled groups (we were related and the math checks out), but you need economic theories to make sense of cooperation beyond kin groups.
    so theories in the social sciences at this level (beyond kin groups) become probabilistic, deterministic. a great example of this is population growth. there is a multitude of evidence that shows that ppulation growth forces resource stress and that generates social conflict, and this then causes people to settle. this is wrong. it originates in Robert Carneiro's work who was trying to study how state societies originated. His model explains them pretty well because it assumes hierarchies - which does not work for complex stateless societies.
    thelatest model from Stanish is that existence of sufficiently robust population densities that increase the benefits of co-operation in any area is the first condition that leds to sustained co-operation. there is an incfrease in the cost of free-riding and co-operation with higher population density. You need them to develop special places (monuments),and for the itensification of this process. low population densities prefer fissioning over cooperation (20+ examples of this i nStanish).
    social complexity, agriculture intensification depends on popuation densities, and is not a reaction to population pressure and resource stress.
    high population density also may occasionally create competitons for status between tribes and emergent leaders of tribes, because ostacrism and fissioning are expensive when there is high populatuion density. if there is no one arouind youcan just gosomewhere new and settle, but if you are surrounded by rival villages, nearly every autonomous society on record has a form of ostracism in their toolkit and a myth for why it is bad.
    Strategy selection in cultural evolution. this is the natural selection mechanism for the evolution of cooperation, that is a foil to natural selection in biological evolution. with cooperation, the range of choices is not infinite, and individuals are selecting for better biological reproduction, or creating economic resources relative to alternatives. it is not the group that is selected for, but the strategy of the group determines the economic advantage which is the locus of selection.
    when several factors, minimal population densities, xufficient resource concentration to support semisendentism, a suficient degree of resource constancy, and eficient economic organizations tructured by ritual are established = complex sociological organizations develop. the model takes as a given that people are selfish, ego directed, but also that population densities are sufficiently high that there will always be competition between groups. competition can take the form of in-group cooperatuion, and the groups that adopt strategies for creating more resources by working together will beat groups that do not, and recruit people to their cause more, and these strategies will aos be imitated by others at a higher rate.
    there is a critical differnce between humans and other animals that renders all arguments against group selection moot. humans are able to solve the free-rider problem by monitoring and enforcing compliance to group goals.
    BUT the group benefits insofar as the individuals in that group benefit. there is still a debate on whether the instinct is natural selection or a cultural transmission process, buitthe results are the same in small group-behavior over deep historical time.

Chapter 7: The Evolution of ritualized economies: the archaeological evidence

    the neolithic demographic transition is the period between the paleolithic and paleoindian / early archaic huinter-gathere-forageer adaptations. it consisted of the increased population density that allowed for complex stateless societies to develop.
    the first complex societieis emerged around 11000 years ago between the Nile Valley and China. it is marked by the relatively abrupt increase in the immature proportion of skeletons observed in cemetaries across the foraging-farming transition. it is a worlwide pattern associated qwith the adoption of agriculture. the earliest evidence in the Levant was large villages occupied y ear round and evidence for social differentiation.
    the question remais - when did population densities increaase relative to the construction of settled villages, speical places (monuiments), etc? the canonically accepted answer is population pressure forced adoptionof agriculture and settlement. this is not necessarily true. in the model fromthis book, increased population densities provide the context for increased co-operation. poplation icreases precede the increase of social complexity. hard to tell exactly which came first, but it seems that they at least covaried.
    population density promotes migration, a need to find ne arable land, etc
    in Zheng 2012 they analyzed mtDNA derived from modern populations of africa europe and maerica, and they found evidence of major demographgic expansion befoer agricultgure and the neolithic period, after the last glacial maximum. (Zheng, Hong-Xiang, Shi Yan, Zhen-Dong Qin, and Li Jin. 2012. MtDNA analysis of global populations support that major population expansions began before

Neolithic time. Scientific Reports 2: Article 745. doi:10.1038/srep00745.)

    between 6000 and 5610 BC they noticed the same pattern in Britain. https://www.dropbox.com/s/tqx3pof153bs1xh/Screen%20Shot%202021-01-17%20at%207.26.11%20PM.png?dl=0
    there is a common pattern i nthe old world (europe and near east), first population density increases, then social complexity, which is followed by a very rapid population increase. but initial social complexity (agricultural economies) first require a population density increase to minimum levels.

    Scholars who hold different theories about these processes will of course argue that one of these factors precedes the other. Traditional theorists of pop- ulation pressure models will insist that all of the major population increases were first, while those who see the adoption of agriculture to be the cause of fertility increases will argue the opposite. The brute truth is that, at the present time, our data are only unambiguous enough to say that there is a gen- eral correlation between population density increases, agricultural economies, and the initial development of social complexity. This pattern is sufficient to satisfy the criterion that a minimal level of population density is required for the evolution of co-operation via ritualized economies in the model developed here.>>>

        the overall takeaway here is that in the Andean and north american sites, there is evidence for substantial population growth first, followd by cooperation and its hallmarks. ritualization and cooperative family structures do not happen until there is critical mass of humans, and often this critical mass doesnt even need to comefrom farming, in the andes for instnce it can come from marine economie (fish)
        the labor at special sites also historically took advantage of innovations in fairness. i.e. the shicra bag allowed people to carry rocks in same size bags up to a special site to build a monument. it also gave people an easy way to index on fairness. the question to ask is say at a construction site, how fairly is the work divided between technical people and laborers? is that one of the innovations of the west in that it let technical people exist (specialists) vs. mere laborers?
        also very very little evidence of coercion at these special sites of ritualized complex stateless societies. no mass graves, no beatings, no murders, etc
        Geoglyphs like the nazca plains in peru basically totally disappear with the formation of the early states.

    transition to state societies is not a discrete event but a process in which coer- cive mechanisms take generations to coalesce and institutionalize. This tran- sition is uneven, and we see in areas of state development a fluid process in which coercive social structures develop and collapse as kin groups resist loss of autonomy.>>>

    This analysis leads us to propose that people in the lower valley settle- ments demarcated places and times for interregional interaction between high- landers and coastal populations and that these places were exemplified by sites like Cerro del Gentil. These ritualized movements and astronomically defined schedules encouraged and promoted this interaction. The ritualized landscape publically concentrated the mounds and settlements as focal points for social gatherings, but it was also a product of these gatherings. The sixteenth-century Quechua term jach’a allitataña, defined as “a fair or solemn market,” best cap- tures the essence of this ancient area. The act of creating geoglyphs within the broader ritualized landscape and effectively creating ritual pathways organized in time by at least the winter solstice was a key component of individual partic- ipation in such events. It certainly was a significant component of co-operative strategies within communities as they competed with other settlements using potlatching-style feasting to garner more people to their factions and to create a complex regional political system.>>>

    - sites like gobelkli tepe in turkey and Cerro del Gentil in Peru are located in areas that are neutral, onhigh ground, not surrounded by resources so that they appear neutral, and then ascend to the site at designated times and ways to trade and converse. this is a super common pattern across the world in stateless complex societies.open and visible site as well to ensure ritualized exchange and reinforced norms of fairness
    I do reject the idea that Poverty Point is a large and precise calendar to mark days or even hours. The alignments were not intended to be a precise timepiece. Rather, solstice marking around the world in stateless societies is a very obvious and almost universal means of knowing within a day or two the time of great festive events. By “universal,” I simply mean that the solstice azimuths do not vary much at all over very large regions. Therefore people throughout a vast region, such as the entire North American continent, would experience the same azimuth position of the solstices.>>>

- Time: the many local systems of time reckoning, e.g. how trobrianders keep time with the moon, how others use solstices etc, then came together to a regional one. Regional time allowed people to coordiante and cooperate across time and space. this was primarily done by marking solstices, cause local time keepign varied too much (based on tides, or fruits blooming or whatever)

- the key question we seek to answer here: what were the conditions that led to consistent multigenerational cooperation between nonkin groups that gave us complex society independently many times in the old world and the americas? an important observation here is that the processes were similar all over the world. this means there is something in the nature of human interactionunder similar circumstances that leads to predictable emergent complexity.

- Leadership in stateless societies did not arise as a necessary evil but as a consensual managerial style of authority that functioned to schedule labor tasks and redistribute the results of specialized craft production and trade. structured by ritual and rewarded by feasts.

- in the old model of the neolithic, population pressure was a negative on peoples' well-being and forced people to adapt with hierarchy, agriculture, and war. in this new perspective ,high population densities ALLOWED for cooperation between groups and drastically altered the cost-benefit landscape. the least costly behavior used to be migration. but once the habitable regions were filled the simple response of out-migration or fissioning became too costly and the benefits of co-operation became obvious.

- this, the ritualized economy allowed for redistribution of cooperatively produced goods in a fair and LEGIBLE way by the community. in the absence of coercive state structures, ritual feasting and taboo encoded social norms, until the Bronze Age.

- and this dynamic repeated itself with selective pressure, spreading specifically through imitation and or absorption by neighboring groups.

    This book ends with the formation of class-based societies that emerge out of complex stateless ones. These of course are what we customarily understand to be archaic states (Feinman and Marcus 1998). State formation is rare and is not an event but rather a long process that took centuries to occur. As with the emergence of complex stateless societies, there is something emergent in the nature of human interaction in certain contexts that leads in a few instances to the development of coercive, class societies. These cultural contexts, to be sure, include the existence of numerous, competing complex stateless societies in any region. What happens in state formation is the transformation of norms of co-operation to ideologies in which coercion becomes a major factor in main- taining the group. Coercion, conflict, ideologies of power, and so forth emerge as part of the state-building process.>>>
    In game theory terms, we see a shift from simple non-co-operative game strategies to an environment where both non-co-operative as well as co- operative strategies come into play.35 In the latter, various coalitions of groups co-operate among themselves. In the state formation process, coalitions develop out of stateless societies. These coalitions can be classes as understood in the traditional literature and/or can be groups of elites that emerge from the managerial leadership.

Henry Wright (1984:69) suggested that the development of states would be accompanied by a process whereby local ranked groups would merge into “a region-wide chiefly or noble class.” Archaeological research in the last 30 years has indeed demonstrated that such local elite groups develop horizontal ties among themselves in a sort of mutual aid phenomenon. The emergence of a regional elite ideology that reinforces leaders’ power is part of the process of elite class formation. Wright, in the same paper (Wright 1984:69), refers to this as the generation of “an ideology of chiefly sanctity sufficient to command regular tribute from commoner producers.”>>>
